.TH XTVER 1 "2026-03-02" "xtver 0.1.1" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
xtver \- query the terminal emulator's name and version via XTVERSION
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xtver
.RB [ \-\-mux ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xtver
sends the XTVERSION escape sequence
.RB ( "CSI > q" )
to the terminal via
.IR /dev/tty ,
reads the DCS response, prints the version string to stdout, and exits.
.PP
If the terminal does not respond within 2 seconds, or if
.I /dev/tty
is unavailable, an error is printed to stderr and the program exits with
status 1.
.PP
Works correctly when stdin or stdout are redirected, since the terminal
device is accessed directly.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-mux
Also query and append the tmux version to the output.
Has no effect when used outside tmux — output is identical to running without
the flag.
.PP
Output format with
.BR \-\-mux :
.PP
.EX
<terminal>,tmux <version>
.EE
.PP
The comma delimiter allows straightforward parsing with
.BR cut (1):
.PP
.EX
xtver \-\-mux | cut \-d, \-f1   # terminal
xtver \-\-mux | cut \-d, \-f2   # tmux
.EE
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Version string successfully obtained and printed.
.TP
.B 1
Any failure: no TTY, terminal does not support XTVERSION, timeout,
parse error, or tmux query failure when
.B \-\-mux
is used inside tmux.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TMUX
If set, the query is wrapped in a tmux DCS passthrough sequence so it
reaches the outer terminal.
See
.B TMUX
section below.
.
.SH TMUX
Inside a tmux session,
.B xtver
automatically wraps the query in a DCS passthrough sequence:
.PP
.EX
ESC P tmux ; ESC ESC [ > q ESC \e
.EE
.PP
This requires passthrough to be enabled in
.IR tmux.conf :
.PP
.EX
set \-g allow\-passthrough on
.EE
.PP
Without this option, tmux silently drops the passthrough and
.B xtver
will time out with exit status 1.
Nested tmux sessions are not supported.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
Print the terminal version:
.PP
.EX
$ xtver
WezTerm 20240203\-110809\-5046fc22
.EE
.PP
Use in a script:
.PP
.EX
if version=$(xtver 2>/dev/null); then
    echo "terminal: $version"
else
    echo "terminal does not support XTVERSION"
fi
.EE
.
.PP
Print terminal and tmux version (inside tmux):
.PP
.EX
$ xtver \-\-mux
WezTerm 20240203\-110809\-5046fc22,tmux 3.3a
.EE
.PP
Extract just the tmux version:
.PP
.EX
$ xtver \-\-mux | cut \-d, \-f2
tmux 3.3a
.EE
.
.SH ZELLIJ
Zellij intercepts XTVERSION and responds with its own version string.
.B xtver
therefore works inside Zellij without any configuration and returns the Zellij
version directly.
.PP
Zellij does not implement DCS passthrough, so there is currently no way to
query the outer terminal from inside a Zellij session.
.B \-\-mux
has no effect inside Zellij.
.
.SH SHELL PROFILE INTEGRATION
.B xtver
is designed for use in shell profiles to apply terminal-specific configuration.
Because it queries
.I /dev/tty
directly, it works correctly over SSH where environment variables like
.B $TERM_PROGRAM
are unreliable.
.PP
.EX
if _term=$(xtver 2>/dev/null); then
    case "$_term" in
        kitty*)
            alias ssh='kitten ssh'
            infocmp "$TERM" &>/dev/null || export TERM=xterm-256color ;;
        Ghostty*)
            infocmp "$TERM" &>/dev/null || export TERM=xterm-256color ;;
        iTerm2*)
            source ~/.iterm2_shell_integration.zsh 2>/dev/null ;;
        WezTerm*)
            alias icat='wezterm imgcat' ;;
    esac
fi
unset _term
.EE
.
.SH NOTES
XTVERSION is supported by most modern terminal emulators: WezTerm, kitty,
Alacritty, foot, XTerm, iTerm2, and others.
Older terminals and plain terminal multiplexers will not respond.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xterm (1)
.
.SH AUTHORS
Ivan Grynov <rmrf@x123.net>
.
.SH LICENSE
GPL-3.0-only. See
.UR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html
.UE
